The Fall of the house of Usher

	During the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day in the autumn
of the year, when the clouds hung oppressively low in the heavens, 
I had been passing alone, on horseback, through a singularly dreary
tract of country; and at length found myself, as the shades of evening
drew on, within view of the melancholy House of Usher.  I know not how
it was -- but, with the first glimpse of the building, a sense of
insufferable gloom pervaded my spirit.  I say insufferable; for the
feeling was unrelieved by any of that half-pleasurable, because poetic
sentiment, with which the mind usually receives even the sternest
natural images of the desolate or terrible.  I looked upon the scene 
before me -- upon the mere house, and the simple landscape features 
of the domain -- upon the blank walls -- upon the vacant eye-like 
windows -- upon a few rank sedges -- and upon a few white trunks of
decayed trees -- with an utter depression of soul which I can compare
to no earthly sensation more properly than to the after-dream of the
reveller upon opium -- the bitter lapse into every-day life -- the
hideous dropping off of the veil.  There was an iciness, a sinking, a
sickening of the heart -- an unredeemed dreariness of thought which no
goading of the imagination could torture into aught of the sublime.
What was it -- I paused to think -- what was it that so unnerved me
in the contemplation of the House of Usher?  It was a mystery all
insoluable; nor could I grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded
conclusion, that while, beyond doubt, there are combinations of very
simple natural objects which have the power of thus affecting us, still
the analysis of this power lies among considerations beyond our depth.
It was possible, I reflected, that a mere different arrangement of the
particulars of the scene, of the details of the picture, would be 
sufficient to modify, or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowful
impression; and, acting upon this idea, I reined my horse to the 
precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in the unruffled
lustre by the dwelling, and gazed down -- but with a shudder even more
thrilling than before -- upon the remodelled and inverted images of the
gray sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, and the vacant and eye-like
windows.
	Nevertheless, in this mansion of gloom I now proposed to myself a
sojourn of some weeks.  Its proprietor, Roderick Usher, had been one
of my boon companions in boyhood; but many years had elapsed since our 
last meeting.  A letter, howver, had lately reached me in a distant
part of the country -- a letter from him -- which in its wildly 
importunate nature, had admitted of no other than a personal reply.
The MS. gave evidence of nervous agitation.  The writer spoke of acute
bodily illness -- ofa mental disorder which oppressed him -- and of an
earnest desire to see me, as his best, and indeed his only personal
friend, with a view of attempting, by the cheerfulness of my society,
some alleviation of his malady.  It was the manner in which all this,
and much more, was said -- it was the apparent heart that went with his
request -- which allowed me no room for hesitation; and I accordingly
obeyed forthwith what I still considered a very singular summons.

Although, as boys, we had been even intimate associates, yet I really
knew very little of my friend.  His reserve had been always excessive
and habitual.  I was aware, however, that his very ancient family had
been noted, time out of mind, for a peculiar sensibility of temperament,
displaying itself, through long ages, in many works of exalted art,
and manifested, of late, in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive
charity, as well as in a passionate devotion to the intricacies, perhaps
even more than to the orthodox and easily recognisable beauties, of
musical science.  I had learned, too, the very remarkable fact, that the
stem of the Usher race, all time-honoured as it was, had put forth, at
no period, any enduring branch; in other words, that the entire family
lay in the direct line of descent, and had always, with very trifling
and very temporary variation, so lain.  It was this deficiency, I
considered, while running over in thought the perfect keeping of the
character of the premises with the accredited character of the people,
and while speculating upon th possible influence which the one, in
the long lapse of centuries might have exercised upon the other -- it
was this deficiency, perhpaps, of collateral issue, and the consequent
undeviating transmission, from sire to son, of the patrimony with the 
name, which had, at length, so identified the two as to merge the original
title of the estate in the quaint and equivocal appellation of the
'House of Usher' -- an appellation which seemed to include, in the minds
of the peasantry who used it, both the family and the family mansion.

I have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish experiment --
that of looking down within the tarn -- had been to deepen the first
singular impression.  There can be no doubt that the consciousness of
the rapid increase of my superstition -- for why should I not so term
it? -- served mainly to accelerate the increase itself.  Such, I have
long known, is the paradoxical law of all sentiments having terror
as a basis.  And it might have been for this reason only, that, when
I again uplifted my eyes to the house itself, from its image in the
pool, there grew in my mind a strange fancy -- a fancy so ridiculous,
indeed, that I but mention it to show the vivid force of the sensations
which oppressed me.  I had so worked upon my imagination as really to
believe that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an atmosphere
peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity -- an atmosphere
which had no affinity with the air of heaven, but which had reeked up
from the the decayed trees, and the gray wall, and the silent tarn -- a
pestilent and mystic vapour, dull, sluggish, faintly discernible, and
leaden-hued.

Shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream, I scanned more
narrowly the real aspect of the building.  Its principal feature seemed
to be that of an excessive antiquity.  The discoloration of ages had been
great.  Minute fungi overspread the whole exterior, hanging in a fine
tangel web-work from the eaves.  Yet all this was apart from any
extraordinary dilapidation.  No portion of the masonry had fallen;
and there appeared to be a wild inconsistency between its still perfect
adaptation of parts, and the crumbling condition of the individual
stones.  In this there was much that reminded me of the specious totality
of old wood-work which has rotted for long years in some neglected vault,
with no disturbance from the breath of the external air.  Beyond this
indication of extensive decay, however, the fabric gave little token
of instability.  Perhaps the eye of a scrutinising observer might
have discovered a barely perceptible fissure, which, extending from the
the roof of the building in front, made its way down the wall in a 
zigzag direction, until it became lost in the sullen waters of the
tarn.

Noticing these things, I rode over a short causeway to the house.
A servant in waiting took my horse, and I entered the Gothic archway
of the hall.  A valet, of stealthy step, thence conducted me, in silence,
through many dark and intricate passages in my progress to the studio
of his master.  Much that I encountered on the way contributed, I know
not how, to heighten the vague sentiments of which I have already spoken.
While the objects around me -- while the carvings of the ceilings, the
sombre tapestries of the walls, the ebon blackness of the floors, and
the phantasmagoric armorial trophies which rattled as I strode, were
but matters to which, or to such as which, I had been accustomed from
my infancy -- while I hesitated not to acknowledge how familiar was all
this -- I still wondered to find how unfamiliar were the fancies which
ordinary images were stirring up.  On one of the stair cases, I met
the physician of the family.  His countenance, I thought, wore a mingled
expression of low cunning and perplexity.  He accosted me with trepidation
and passed on.  The valet now threw open a door and ushered me into the
presence of his master.

The room in which I found myself was very large and lofty.
The windows were long, narrow, and pointed, and at so vast a distance
from the black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible
from within.  Feeble gleams of encrimsoned light made their way through
the trellised panes, and served to render sufficiently distinct the
more prominent objects around; the eye, however, struggled in vain
to reach the remoter angles of the chamber, or the recesses of the
vaulted and fretted ceiling.  Dark draperies hung upon the walls.
The general furniture was profuse, comfortless, antique, and tattered.
Many books and musical instruments lay scattered about, but failed
to give any vitality to the scene.  I felt that I breathed an
atmosphere of sorrow.  An air of stern, deep, and irredeemable gloom
hung over and pervaded all.

Upon my entrance, Usher arose from a sofa on which he had been lying
at full length, and greeted me with a vivacious warmth which had much
in it, I at first thought, of an overdone cordiality -- of the 
constrained effort of the ennuye man of the world.  A glance, however,
at his countenance, convinced me of his perfect sincerity.  We sat down;
and for some moments, while he spoke not, I gazed upon him with a feeling
half of pity, half of awe.  Surely, man had never before so terribly
altered, in so brief a period, as had Roderick Usher!  It was with 
difficulty that I could bring myself to admit the identity of the wan
being before me with the companion of my early boyhood.  Yet the character
of his face had been at all times remarkable.  A cadaverousness of
complexion; an eye large, liquid, and luminous beyond comparison;
lips somewhat thin and very pallid, but of a surpassingly beautiful
curve; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model, but with a breadth of nostril
unusual in similar formations; a finely moulded chin, speaking, in its
want of prominence, of a want of moral energy; hair of a a more than
web-like softness and tenuity; these features, with an inordinate expansion
above the regions of the temple, made up altogether a countenance not
easily to be forgotten.  And now in the mere exaggeration of the prevailing
character of these features, and of the expression they were wont to convey,
lay so much of change that I doubted to whom I spoke.  The now ghastly 
pallor of the skin, and the now miraculous lustre of the eye, above all
things startled and even awed me.  The silken hair, too, had been suffered
to grow all unheeded, and as, in its wild gossamer texture, 
it floated rather than fell about the face, I could not, even with effort,
connect its Arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity.

In the manner of my friend I was at once struck with an incoherence -- an
inconsistency; and I soon found this to arise from a series of feeble
and futile struggles to overcome an habitual trepidancy -- an excessive
nervous agitation.  For something of this nature I had indeed been
prepared, no less by his letter, than by reminiscences of certain boyish
traits, and by conclusions deduced from his peculiar physical conformation
and temperament.  His action was alternately vivacious and sullen.
His voice varied rapidly from a tremulous indecision (when the animal
spirits seemed utterly in abeyance) to that species of energetic concision
-- that leaden, self-balanced and perfectly modulate gutteral utterance,
which may be observed in the lost drunkard, or the irreclaimable eater of
opium, during periods of his most intense excitement.

It was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, of his earnest desire
to see me, and of the solace he expected me to afford him.  He entered,
at some length into what he conceived to be the nature of his malady.
It was, he said, a constitutional and a family evil, and one for which he
despaired to find a remedy -- a mere nervous affection, he immediately
added, which would undoubtedly soon pass off.  It displayed itself in a
host of unnnatural sensations.  Some of these, as he detailed them,
interested and bewildered me; although, perhaps, the terms, and the
general manner of the narration had their weight.  He suffered much
from a morbid acuteness of the senses: the most insipid food was
alone endurable; he could wear only garments of certain texture;
the odours of all flowers were oppressive; his eyes were tortured
by even a faint light; and there were but peculiar sounds, and these
from stringed instruments, which did not inspire him with horror.
To an anomalous species of terror I found him a bounden slave.
I shall perish,' said he, 'I must perish in this deplorable folly.
Thus, thus, and not otherwise, shall I be lost.  I dread the
events of the future, not in themselves, but in their results.
I shudder at the thought of any, even the most trivial incident, which
may operate upon this inolerable agitation of the soul. I have , indeed,
no abhorrence of danger, except in its absolute effect  -- in terror.
In this unnerved -- in this pitable condition -- I feel that the period
will sooner or later arrive when I must abandon life and reason together,
in some struggle with the grim phantasm, FEAR.'
I learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken and equivocal hints,
another singular feature of his mental condition.  He was enchained by
certain superstitious impressions in regard to the dwelling which he
tenanted, and whence, for many years, he had never ventured forth -- in
regard to an influence whose suppositious force was conveyed in terms too
shadowy here to be re-stated -- an influence which some peculiarites in
the mere form and substance of his family mansion, had, by dint of long
sufferance, he said, obtained over his spirit -- an effect which the 
physique of the gray walls and turrets, and of the dim tarn into which 
they all looked down, had, at length, brought about upon the morale
of his existence.

He admitted, howver, although with much hesitation, that much of the
peculiar gloom which thus afflicted him could be traced to a more 
natural and far more palpable origin -- to the severe and long-continued
illness -- indeed to the evidently approaching dissolution -- of a
tenderly beloved sister -- his sole companion for long years -- his last
and only relative on earth.  'Her decease,' he said, with a bitterness
which I can never forget, 'would leave him (him the hopeless and frail) 
the last of the ancient race of Ushers.'  While he spoke, the lady
Madeline (for so was she called) passed slowly through a remote portion
of the apartment, and, without having notice my presence, disappeared.
I regarded her with an utter astonishment not unmingled with dread --
and yet I found it impossible to account for such feelings.  A sensation
of stupor oppressed me, as my eyes followed her retreating steps.
When a door, at length, closed upon her, my glance sought instinctively
and eagerly the countenance of the brother -- but he had buried his
his face in his hands, and I could only perceive that a far more than
wanness had overspread the emaciated finger through which had trickled
many passionate tears.
The disease of the lady Madeline had long baffled the skill of her
physicians.  A settled apathy, a gradual wasting away of the person,
were the usual diagnosis.  Hitherto she had steadily borne up against
the pressure of her malady, and had not betaken herself finally to bed;
but, on the closing in of the evening of my arrival at the house, she
succumbed (as her brother told me at night with inexpressible agitation)
to the prostrating power of the destroyer; and I learned that the glimpse
I had obtained of her person would thus probably be the last I should
obtain -- that the lady, at least while living, would be seen by me
no more.

For several days ensuing, her name was unmentioned by either Usher
or myself: and during this period I was busied in earnest endeavours
to alleviate the melancholy of my friend.  We painted and read together;
or I listened, as if in a dream, to the wild improvisations of his
speaking guitar.  And thus, as a closer and still closer intimacy
admitted me more unreservedly into the recesses of his spirit, the more
bitterly did I perceive the futility of all attempt at cheering a mind
from which darkness, as if an inherent positive quality, poured forth upon
all objects of the moral and physical universe, in one unceasing
radiation of gloom.

I shall ever bear about me a memory of the many solem hours I thus spent
alone with the master of the House of Usher.  Yet I should fail in any
attempt to convey an idea of the exact character of the studies,
or of the occupations, in which he involved me, or led me the way.
An excited and highly distempered ideality threw a sulphureous lustre
over all.  His long improvised dirges will ring forever in my ears.
Among other things, I hold painfully in mind a certain singular
perversion and amplification of the wild air of the last waltz of
Von Weber.  From the painting over which his elaborate fancy brooded,
and which grew, touch by touch, into vaguenesses at which I shuddered
the more thrillingly, because I shuddered knowing not why; -- from these
paintings (vivid as their images now are before me) I would in vain
endeavour to educe more than a small portion which should lie within
the compass of merely written words.  By the utter simplicity, by
the nakedness of his designs, he arrested and overawed attention.
If ever mortal painted an idea, that mortal was Roderick Usher.
For me at least -- in the circumstances then surrounding me -- there
arose out of the pure abstractions which the hypochondriac contrived
to throw upon his canvas, an intensity of intolerable awe, no shadow
of which felt I ever yet in the contemplation of the certainly glowing
yet too concrete reveries of Fuseli.

One of the phantasmogoric conceptions of my friend, partaking not so
rigidly of the spirit of abstraction, may be shadowed forth, although
feebly, in words.  A small picture presented the interior of an
immensely long and rectangular vault or tunnel, with low walls, smooth,
white, and without interruption or device.  Certain accessory points
of the design served well to convey the idea that this excavation
lay at an exceeding depth below the surface of the earth.  No outlet
was observed in any portion of its vast extent, and no torch, or
other artificial source of light was discernible; yet a flood of
intense rays rolled throughout, and bathed the whole in a ghastly
and inappropriate splendour.

I have just spoken of that morbid considtion of the auditory nerve
which rendered all music intolerable to the sufferer, with the 
exception of certain effects of stringed instruments.  It was,
perhaps, the narrow limits to which he thus confined himself
upon the guitar, which gave birth, in great measure, to the fantastic
character of his performances.  But the fervid facility of his
impromptus could not be so accounted for.  They must have been,
and were, in the notes, as well as in the words of his wild fantasias
(for he not unfrequently accompanied himself with rhymed verbal 
improvisations), the result of that intense mental collectedness
and concentration to which I have previously alluded as observable 
only in particular moments of the highest artificial excitement.
The words of one of these rhapsodies I have easily remembered.
I was, perhaps, the more forcibly impressed with it, because,
in the under or mystic current of its meaning, I fancied that I
perceived, and for the first time, a full consciousness on the
part of Usher, of the tottering of his lofty reason upon her throne.
The verses, which were entitled 'The Haunted Palace,' ran very nearly,
if not accurately, thus:

			1

	In the greenest of our valleys,
	  By good angels tenanted,
	Once a fair and stately palace --
	  Radiant palace -- reared its head.
	In the monarch Thought's dominion --
	  It stood there!
	Never seraph spread a pinion
	  Over fabric half so fair.

			2

	Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
	  On its roof did float and flow
	(This -- all this -- was in the olden
	  Time long ago)
	And every gentle air that dallied
	  In that sweet day,
	Along the ramparts plumed and pallied,
	  A winged odour went away.

			3

	Wanderers in that happy vally
	  Through two luminous windows saw
	Spirits moving musically 
	  To a lute's well-tuned law,
	Round about a throne, where sitting
	  (Porphyrogene!)
	In state his glory well befitting,
	  The ruler of the realm was seen.
 			4

	And all with peral and ruby glowing
	  Was the fair palace door
	Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing
	  And sparkling evermore,
	A troop of Echoes whose sweet duty
	  Was but to sing,
	In voices of supassing beauty,
	  The wit and wisdom of their king.

			5

	But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
	  Assailed the monarch's high estate;
	(Ah, let us mourn, for never morrow
	  Shall dawn upon him, desolate!)
	And, round about his home, the glory
	  That blushed and bloomed
	Is but a dim-remembered stroy
	  Of the old time entombed.

			6

	And travellers now within that valley,
	  Through the red-litten windows, see
	Vast forms that move fantastically
	  To a discordant melody;
	While, like a rapid ghastly river,
	  Through the pale door,
	A hideous throng rush out forever,
	  And laugh -- but smile no more.


I well remember that suggestions arising from this ballad, led us
into a train of thought wherein there became manifest an opinion of
Usher's which I mention not so much on account of its novelty, 
(for other men have thought thus,) as on account of the pertinacity
with which he maintained it.  This opinion, in its general form, was
that of the sentience of all vegetable things.  But in his disordered
fancy, the idea had assumed a more daring character, and trespassed,
under certains conditions, upon the kingdom of inorganization.  I lack
words to express the full extent, or the earnest abandon of his 
persuasion.  The belief, however, was connected (as I have previously
hinted) with the gray stones of the home of his forefathers.  The 
conditions of the sentience had been here, he imagined, fulfilled
in the method of the collocation of these stones -- in the order of
their arrangement, as well as in that of the many fungi which overspread
them, and of the decayed trees which stood around -- above all, in the
long undisturbed endurance of this arrangement, and in its reduplication
in the still waters of the tarn.  Its evidence -- the evidence of the
sentience -- was to be seen, he said, (and here I started as he spoke,)
in the gradual yet certain condensation of an atmosphere of their own about
the waters and the walls.  The result was discoverable, he added, in that
silent, yet importunate and terrible influence which for centuries had
moulded the destinies of his family, and which made him what I now saw him
-- what he was.  Such opinions need no comment, and I will make none.
 
Our books -- the books which, for years, had formed no small portion
of the mental existence of the invalid -- were, as might be supposed
in strict keeping with this character of phantasm.  We pored together
over such works as the Ververt et Chartreuse of Gresset; the Belphegor
of Machiavelli; the Heaven and Hell of Swedenbor; the Subterranean
Voyage of Nicholas Klimm by Holberg; the Chiromancy of Robert Flud,
of Jean D'Indagine, and od De la Chambre; the Journey into the Blue
Distance of Tieck; and the City of the Sun of Campanella.  One favourite
volume was a small octavo editon of the Directorium Inquisitorum,
by the Dominican Eymeric de Gironne; and there were passages in Pomponius
Mela, about the old African Satyrs and Aegipans, over which usher would
sit dreaming for hours.  His chief delight, however, was found in the
in the perusal of an exceedingly rare and curious book in quarto
Gothic -- the manual of a forgotten church -- the Vigiliae Mortuorum
secundum Chorum Ecclesiae Maguntinae.

I could not help thinking of the wild ritual of this work, and of its
probable influence upon the hypochondriac, when, one evening, having
informed me abruptly that the lady Madeline was no more, he stated
his intention of preserving her corpse for a fortnight, (previously
to its final interment,) in one of the numerous vaults within the main
walls of the building.  The worldly reason, however, assigned for this
singular proceeding, was one which I did not feel at liberty to dispute.
The brother had been led to his resolution (so he told me) by consideration
of the unusual character of the malady of the deceased, of certain
obtrusive and eager inquiries on the part of her medical men, and of the
remote and exposed situation of the burial-ground of the family. 
I will not deny that when I called to mind the sinister countenance of
the person whom I met upon the staircase, on the day of my arrival at
the house, I had no desire to oppose what I regared as at best but a
a harmless, and by no means an unnatural, precaution.

At the request of Usher, I personally aided him in the arrangements for
the temporary entombment.  The body having been encoffined, we two
alone bore it to its rest.  The vault in which we placed it (and
which had been so long unopened that our torches, half smothered in
its oppressive atmosphere, gave us little opportunity for investigation)
was small, damp, nad entirely without means of admission for light;
lying, at great depth, immediately beneath that portion of the building 
in which was my own sleeping apartment.  It had been used, apparently,
in remote feudal times, for the worst purposes of a donjon-keep, and,
in later days, as a place of deposit for powder, or some other highly
combustible substance, as a portion of its floor, and the whole interior 
of a long archway through which we reached it, were carefully sheathed
with copper.  The door, of massive iron, had been, also, similarly
protected.  Its immense weight caused an unusually sharp grating sound,
as it moved upon its hinges.

Having deposited our mournful burden upon tressels within this region
of horror, we partially turned aside the yet unscrewed lid of the coffin,
and looked upon the face of the tenant.  A striking similitude between
the brother and sister now first arrested my attention; and Usher,
divining, perhaps, my thoughts, murmured out some few words from which
I learned that the deceased and himself had been twins, and that sympathies
of a scarcely intelligible nature had always existed between them.
Our glances, however, rested not long upon the dead -- for we could not
regard her unawed.  The disease which had thus entombed the lady in the
maturity of youth, had left, as usual in all maladies of a strictly 
cataleptical character, the mockery of a faint blush upon the bosom and
the face, and that suspiciously lingering smile upon the lip which is
so terrible in death.  We replaced and screwed down the lid, and, having
secured the door of iron, made our way, with toil, into the scarcely
less gloomy apartments of the upper portion of the house.

And now, some days of bitter grief having elapsed, an observable change
came over the features of the mental disorder of my friend.  His ordinary
occupations were neglected or forgotten.  He roamed from chamber to 
to chamber with hurried, unequal, an objectless step.  The pallor of his
countenance had assumed, if possible, a more ghastly hue -- but the
the luminousness of his eye had utterly gone out.  The once occasional
huskiness of his tone was heard no more; and a tremulous quaver, as if
of extreme terror, habitually charcterized his utterance.  There were
times, indeed, when I thought his unceasingly agitated mind was labouring
with some oppressive secret, to divulge which he struggled for the 
necessary courage.  At times, again, I was obliged to resolve all into 
the mere inexplicable vagaries of madness, for I beheld him gazing upon
vacancy for long hours, in an attitude of the profoundest attention, as
if listening to some imaginary sound.  It was no wonder that his condition
terrified -- that it infected me.  I felt creeping upon me, by slow
yet certain degrees, the wild influences of his own fantastic yet impressive
superstitions.

It was, especially, upon retiring to bed late in the night of the seventh
or eighth day after the placing of the lady Madeline within the donjon,
that I experienced the full power of such feelings.  Sleep came not near
near my couch -- while the hours waned and waned away.  I struggled to 
reason off the nervousness which had dominion over me.  I endeavoured to
believe that much, if not all of what I felt, was due to the bewildering
influence of the gloomy furniture of the room -- of the dark and tattered
draperies, which, tortured into motion by the breath of a rising tempest,
swayed fitfully to and from upon the walls, and rustled uneasily about the
decorations of the bed.  But my efforts were fruitless.  An irrepressible
tremour gradually pervaded my frame; and, at length, there sat upon my
very hear an incubus of utterly causeless alarm.  Shaking this off with
a gasp and a struggle, I uplifted myself upon the pillows, and, peering
earnestly within the intense darkness of the chamber, hearkened --
I know not why, except that an instinctive spirit prompted me  --
to certain low and indefinite sounds which came, through the pauses of
the storm, at long intervals, I knew not whence.  Overpowered by an intense
sentiment of horror, unaccountable yet unendurable, I threw on my clothes 
with haste (for I felt that I should sleep no more during the night),
and endeavoured to arouse myself from the pitiable condition into which 
I had fallen, by pacing rapidly to and fro through the apartment.

I had taken but few turns in this manner, when a light step on an
adjoining staircase arrested my attention.  I presently recognized it
as that of Usher.  In an instant afterward he rapped, with a gentle
touch, at my door, and entered, bearing a lamp.  His countenance was,
as usual, cadaverously wan -- but, moreover, there was a species of 
mad hilarity in his eyes -- an evidently restrained hysteria in his 
whole demeanour.  His air appalled me -- but anything was preferable
to the solitude which I had so long endured, and I even welcomed his 
presence as a relief. 
 'And you have not seen it?' he said abruptly, after having stared
about him for some moments in silence -- 'you have not then seen it?
-- but, stay! you shall.'  Thus speaking, and having carefully shaded
his lamp, he hurried to one of the casements, and threw it freely open
to the storm.

The impetuous fury of the entering gust nearly lifted us from our feet.
It was, indeed, a tempestuous yet sternly beautiful night, and one
wildly singular in its terror and its beauty.  A whirlwind had apparently
collected its force in our vicinity; for there were frequent and violent
alterations in the direction of the wind; and the exceeding density of the
clouds (which hung so low as to press upon the turrets of the house)
did not prevent our perceiving the life-like velocity with which they
flew careering from all points against each other, without passing
away into the distance.  I say that even their exceeding density did not
prevent our perceiving this -- yet we had no glimpse of the moon or 
stars -- nor was there any flashing forth of the lightning.  But the
under surfaces of the huge masses of agitated vapour, as well as all
terrestrial objects immediately around us, were glowing in the 
unnatural light of a faintly luminous and distincly visible gaseous
exhalation which hung about and enshrouded the mansion.

You must not -- you shall not behold this!' said I, shudderingly, to
Usher, as I led him, with a gentle violence, from the window to a seat.
'These appearances, which bewilder you, are merely electrical phenomena
not uncommon -- or it may be that they have their ghastly origin in the
rank miasma of the tarm.  Let us close this casement; -- the air is 
chilling and dangerous to your frame.   Here is one of your favourite
romances.  I will read, and you shall listen; -- and so we will pass
away this terrible night together.'

The antique volume which I had taken up was the 'Mad Trist' of Sir
Launcelot Canning; but I had called it a favourite of Usher's more in
sad jest than in earnest; for, in truth, there is little in its uncouth
and unimaginative prolixity which could have had interest for the lofty
and spiritual ideality of my friend.  It was, however, the only book 
immediately at hand; and I indulged a vague hope that the excitement
which agitated the hypochondriac, might find relief (for the history of 
mental disorder is full of similar anomalies) even in the extremeness
of the folly which I should read.  Could I have judged, indeed, by the
wild overstrained air of vivacity with which he hearkened, or apparently
hearkened, to the words of the tale, I might well have congratulated
myself upon the success of my design.

I had arrived at that well-known portion of the story where Ethelred,
the hero of the Trist, having sought in vain for peaceable admission
into the dwelling of the hermit, proceeds to make good an entrance by
force.  Here, it will be remembered, the words of the narrative run thus:
'And Ethelred, who was by nature of a doughy heart, and who was now mighty
withal, on account of the powerfulness of the wine which he had drunken,
waited no longer to hold parley with the hermit,  who, in sooth,
was of an obstinate and maliceful turn, but, feeling the rain upon his
shoulders, and fearing the rising of the tempest, uplifted his mace upright,
and, with blows, made quickly room in the plankings of the door for his
gauntleted hand; and now pulling therewith sturdily, he so cracked, ripped,
and tore all asunder, that the noise of the dry and hollow-sounding wood
alarumed and reverberated throughout the forest.'

At the termination of this sentence I started, and for a moment, paused;
for it appeared to me (although I at once concluded that my excited fancy
had deceived me) -- it appeared to me that, from some very remote portion
of the mansion, there came, indistinctly, to my ears, what might have been,
in its exact similarity of character, the echo (but a stifled and dull one
certainly) of the very cracking and ripping sound which Sir Launcelot had
so particularly described.  It was, beyond doubt, the coincidence alone 
which had arrested my attention; for, amid the rattling of the sashes of the
casements, and the ordinary commingled noises of the still increasing storm,
the sound, in itself, had nothing, surely, which should have interested or
disturbed me.  I continued the story:

'But the good champion Ethelred, now entering within the door, was sore 
enraged and amazed to perceive no signal of the maliceful hermit; but,
in the stead thereof, a dragon of a scaly and prodigious demeanour, and
of a fiery tongue, which sate in guard before a palace of gold, with a
floor of silver; and upon the wall there hung a shield of shining brass
with this legend enwritten --
	Who entereth herein, a conqueror had bin;
	Who slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win;

And Ethelred uplifted his mace, and struck upon the head of the dragon,
which fell before him, and gave up his pesty breath, with a shriek so
horrid and harsh, and withal so piercing, that Ethelred had fain to close
his ears with his hands against the dreadful noise of it, the like
whereof was never before heard.'

Here again I paused abruptly, and now with a feeling of wild amazement --
for there could be no doubt whatever that, in this instance, I did actually
hear (although from what direction it proceeded I found it impossible to say)
a low and apparently distant, but harsh, protracted, and most unusually
screaming or grating sound -- the exact counterpart of what my fancy
had already conjured up for the dragon's unnatural shriek as described by
the romancer.

Oppressed, as I certainly was, upon the occurrence of the second and most
extraordinary coincidence, by a thousand conflicting sensations, in which
wonder and extreme terror were predominant, I still retained sufficient
presence of mind to avoid exciting, by any observation, the sensitive 
nervousness of my companion.  I was by no means certain that he had
noticed the sounds in question; although, assuredly, a strange alteration 
had, during the last few minute, taken place in his demeanour.  From a
position fronting my own, he had gradually brought round his chair, so
as to sit with his face to the door of the chamber; and thus I could but
partially perceive his features, although I saw that his lips trembled
as if he were murmuring inaudibly.  His head had dropped upon his breast
-- yet I knew that he was not asleep, from the wide and rigid opening 
of the eye as I caught a glance of it in profile.  The motion of his body,
too, was at variance with this idea -- for he rocked from side to side
with a gentle yet constant and uniform sway.  Having rapidly taken notice
of all this, I resumed the narrative of Sir Launcelot, which thus
proceeded:

'And now, the champion, having escaped from the terrible fury of the dragon,
bethinking himself of the brazen shield, and of the breaking up of the
enchantment which was upon it, removed the carcas from out of the way
before him, and approached valorously over the silver pavement of the castle to
where the shield was upon the wall; which in sooth tarried not for his full
coming, but fell down at his feet upon the silver floor, with a mighty
great and terrible ringing sound.'

No sooner had these syllable passed my lips, than -- as if a shield of
brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavily upon a floor of silver --
I became aware of a distinct, hollow, metallic, and clangorous, yet
apparently muffled reverberation.  Completely unnerved, I leaped to my
feet; but the measured rocking movement of Usher was undisturbed.
I rushed to the chair in which he sat.  His eyes were bent fixedly before
him, and throughout his whole countenance there reigned a stony rigidity.
But, as I placed my hand upon his shoulder, there came a strong shudder 
over his whole person; a sickly smile quivered about his lips; and I saw
that he spoke in a low, hurried, and gibbering murmur, as if unconscious
of my presence.  Bending closely over him, I at lenght drank in the
hideous import of his words.

'Not hear it? -- Yes, I hear it, and have heard it.  Long -- long -- long --
many minutes, many hours, many days, have I heard it -- yet I dared not --
oh, pity me, miserable wretch that I am! -- I dared not -- I dared not speak!
We have put her living in the tomb!  Said I not that my senses were acute?
I now tell you that I heard her first feeble movemtents in the hollow
coffin.  I heard them -- many, many days ago -- yet I dare not -- I dared
not speak!  And now -- to-night -- Ethelred -- ha! ha! -- the breaking of 
the hermit's door, and the death-cry of the dragon, and the clangour of the
shield! -- say, rather, the rending of her coffin and the grating of the
iron hinges of her prison, and her struggles within the coppered archway
of the vault!  Oh whither shall I fly?  Will she not be here anon?  Is
she not hurrying to upbraid me for my haste?  Have I not heard her footstep
on the stair?  Do I not distinguish that heavy and horrible beating of her
heart?  MADMAN! -- here he sprang furiously to his feet, and shrieked out
his syllables, as if in the effort he were giving up his soul -- MADMAN!
I TELL YOU THAT SHE NOW STANDS WITHOUT THE DOOR!'

As if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had been found the
potency of a spell -- the huge antique panels to which the speaker pointed,
threw slowly back, upon the instant, their ponderous and ebony jaws.  It
was the work of the rushing gust -- but then without those doors there
DID stnad the lofty and enshrouded figure of the lady Madeline of Usher.
There was blood upon her every portion of her emaciated frame.  For a
moment she remained trembling and reeling to and from upon the threshold,
then, with a low moaning cry, fell heavily inward upon the person of
her brother, and in her violent and now final death-agonies, bore him
to the floor a corpse, and a victim to the terrors he had anticipated.

From that chamber, and from that mansion, I fled aghast.  The storm was
still abroad in all its wrath as I found myself crossing the old 
causeway.  Suddenly there shot along the path a wild light, and I
turned to see whence a gleam so unusual could have issued; for the vast
house and its shadows were along behind me.  The radiance was that of the
full, setting, and glood-red moon which now shone vividly through that
once barely-discerible fissure of which I have before spoken as 
extending from the roof of the building, in a zizag direction, to the 
base.  While I gazed, this fissure rapidly widened -- there came a fierce
breath of the whirlwind -- the entire orb of the satellite burst at once 
upon my sight -- my brain reeled as I saw the mighty walls rushing asunder
-- there was a long tumultuous shouting sound like the voice of a thousand
waters -- and the deep and dank tarn at my feet close sullenly and silently
over the fragments of the 'HOUSE OF USHER.'
Ligeia

I cannot, for my soul, remember how, when, or even precisely where, I
first became acquainted with the lady Ligeia.  Long years have since
elapsed, and my memory is feeble through much suffering.  Or, perhaps,
I cannot now bring these points to mind, because, in truth, the character
of my beloved, her rare learning, her singular yet placid cast of beauty,
and the thrilling and enthralling eloquence of her low musical language,
made their way into my heart by paces so steadily and stealthily progressive
that they have been unnoticed and unknown.  Yet I believe that I met her
first and most frequently in some large, old, decaying city near the
Rhine.  Of her family--I have surely heard her speak.  That it is of a
remotely ancient date cannot be doubted.  Ligeia!  Ligeia!  Buried in studies
of a nature more than all else adapted to deaden impressions of the outward
world, it is by that sweet word alone--by Ligeia--that I bring before mine
eyes in fancy the image of her who is no more.  And now, while I write,
a recollection flashes upon me that I have never known the paternal name
of her who was my friend and my betrothed, and who became the partner of
my studies, and finally the wife of my bosom.  Was it a playful charge on
the part of my Ligeia? or was it a test of my strength of affection, that
I should insitute no inquiries upon this point?  or was it rather a caprice
of my own--a wildly romantic offering on the shrine of the most passionate
devotion?  I but indistinctly recall the fact itself--what wonder that I
have utterly forgotten the circumstances which originated or attended it?
And, indeed, if ever that spirit which is entitled Romance--if ever she,
the wan an the misty-winged Ashtophet of idolatrous Egypt, presided, as
they tell, over marriages ill-omened, then most surely she presided over
mine.

There is one dear topic, however, on which my memory fails me not.  It is
the person of Ligeia.  In stature she was tall, somewhat slender, and, in
her latter days, even emaciated.  I would in vain attempt to portray the
majesty, the quiet ease, of her demeanor, or the incomprehensible lightness
and elasticity of her footfall.  She came and departed as a shadow.  I was
never made aware of her entrance into my closed study save by the dear music
of her low sweet voice, as she placed her marble hand upon my shoulder.
In beauty of face no maiden ever equalled her.  It was the radiance of an
opium-dream--an airy and spirit-lifting vision more wildly divine than the
phantasies which hovered about the slumbering souls of the daughters of
Delos.  Yet her featues wer not of that regular mould which we have been
falsely taught to worship in the classical labors of the heathen.  'There
is no exquisite beauty,' says Bacon, Lord Verulam, speaking truly of all
the forms and genera of beauty, 'without some strangeness in the 
proportion.'  Yet, although I saw that the features of Ligeia were not of
a classic regularity--although I perceived that her loveliness was indeed
'exquisite,' and felt that there was much of 'strangeness' pervading it,
yet I have tried in vain to detect the irregularity and to trace home my
own perception of 'the strange.'  I examined the contour of the lofty and
pale forehead--it was faultless--how cold indeed that word when applied to
a majesty so divine!--the skin rivalling the purest ivory, the commanding
extent and repose, the gently prominence of the regions above the temples;
and then the raven-black, the glossy, the luxuriant and naturally-curling
tresses, setting forth the full force of the Homeric epithet, 'hyacinthine!'
I looked at the delicate outlines of the nose--and nowhere but in the 
gracefull medallions of the Hebrews had I beheld a similar perfection.
There were the same luxurious smoothness of surface, the same scarcely 
perceptible tendency to the aquiline, the same harmoniously curved nostrils
speaking the free spirit.  I regarded the sweet mouth.  Here was indeed
the triumph of all things heavenly--the magnificent turn of the short
upper lip--the soft, voluputous slumber of the under--the dimples which
sported, and the color which spoke--the teeth glancing back, with a
brilliancy almost startling, every ray of the holy light which fell upon
them in her serence and placid, yet most exultingly radiant of all smiles.
I scrutinized the formation of the chin--and here, too, I found the
gentleness of breadth, the softness and the majesty, the fullness and the
spirituality, of the Greek--the contour which the god Apollo revealed but
in a dream, to Cleomenes, the son of the Athenian.  And then I peered into
the large eyes of Ligeia.

For eyes we have no models in the remotely antique.  It might have been,
too, that in these eyes of my beloved lay the secret to which Lord Verulam
alludes. They were, I must believe, far larger than the oridnary eyes of our
own race.  They were even fuller than the fullest of the gazelle eyes of the
tribe of the valley of Nourjahad.  Yet it was only at intervals--in moments
of intense excitement--that this peculiarity became more than slightly
noticeable in Ligeia.  And at such moments was her beauty--in my heated
fancy thus it appeared perhaps--the beauty of beings either above or apart
from the earth--the beauty of the fabulous Houri of the Turk.  The hue of
the orbs was the most brilliant of black, and, far over them, hung jetty
lashes of great length.  The brows, slightly irregular in outline, had the
same tint.  The 'strangeness,' however, which I found in the eyes, was of a
nature distinct from the formation, or the color, or the brilliancy of the
features, and must, after all, be referred to the expression.  Ah, word of
no meaning! behind whose vast latitude of mere sound we intrench our 
ignorance of so much of the spiritual.  The expression of the eyes of Ligeia!
How for long hours have I pondered upon it!  How have I, through the whole
of a midsummer night, struggled to fathom it!  What was it--that something
more profound than the well of Democritus--which lay far within the pupils
of my beloved?  What was it?  I was possessed with a passion to discover.
Those eyes! those large, those shining, those divine orbs! they became to 
me twin stars of Leda, and I to them devoutest of astrologers.

There is no point, among the many incomprehensible anomolies of the science
of mind, more thrillingly exciting than the fact--never, I believe, noticed
in the schools--that, in our endeavors to recall to memory something long
forgotten, we often find ourselves upon the very verge of remembrance,
without being able, in the end, to remember.  And thus how frequently, in
my intense scrutiny of Ligeia's eyes, have I felt approaching the full
knowledge of their expression--felt it approaching--yet not quite be mine--
and so at length entirely depart!  And (strange, oh strangest mystery of all!)
I found, in the commonest objects of the universe, a circle of analogies to
that expression.  I mean to say that, subsequently to the period when Ligeia's
beauty passed into my spirit, there dwelling as in a shrine, I derived, from
many existences in the material world, a sentiment such as I felt always
aroused within me by her large and luminous orbs.  Yet not the more could I
define that sentiment, or analyze, or even steadily view it.  I recognized
it, let me repeat, sometimes in the survey of a rapidly-growing vine--in the
contemplation of a moth, a butterfly, a chrysalis, a stream of running water.
I have felt it in the ocean; in the falling of a meteor.  I have felt it in
the glances of unusally aged people.  And there are one or two stars in
heaven--(one especially, a star of the sixth magnitude, double and changeable,
to be found near the large star in Lyra) in a telescopic scrutiny of which
I have been made aware of the feeling.  I have been filled with it by certain
sounds from stringed instruments, and not unfrequently by passages from
books.  Among innumerable other instances, I well remember something in a
volume of Joseph Glanvill, which (perhaps merely from its quaintness--who
shall say?) never failed to inspire me with the sentiment;--'And the will
therein lieth, which dieth not.  Who knoweth the mysteries of the will,
with its vigor?  For God is but a great  will pervading all things by nature
of its intentness.  Man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto death
utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble will.'

Length of years, and subsequent reflection, have enabled me to trace, indeed,
some remote connection between this passage in the English moralist and a 
portion of the character of Ligeia.  An intensity in thought, action, or
speech, was possibly, in her, a result, or at least an index, of that
gigantic volition which, during our long intercourse, failed to give other
and more immediate evidence of its existence.  Of all the women whom I have
ever known, she, the outwardly calm, the ever-placid Ligeia, was the most
violently a prey to the tumultuous vultures of stern passion.  And of such
passion I could form no estimate, save by the miraculous expansion of those
eyes which at once so delighted and appalled me--by the almost magical
melody, modulation, distinctness and placidity of her very low voice--and
by the fierce energy (rendered doubly effective by contrast with her manner
of utterance) of the wild words which she habitully uttered.

I have spoken of the learning of Ligeia: it was immense--such as I have never
known in woman. In the classical tongues was she deeply proficient, and as
far as my own acquaintance extended in regard to the modern dialects of
Europe, I have never known her at fault.  Indeed upon any theme of the most
admired, because simply the most abstruse of the boasted erudition of the
academy, have I ever found Ligeia at fault?  How singularly--how thrillingly,
this one point in the nature of my wife has forced itself, at this late
period only, upon my attention!  I said her knowledge was such as I have
never known in woman--but where breathes the man who has traversed, and
successfully, all the wide areas of moral, physical, and mathematical
science?  I saw not then what I now clearly perceive, that the acquisitions
of Ligeia were gigantic, were astounding; yet I was sufficiently aware of
her infinite supremacy to resign myself, with a childlike confidence, to
her guidance through the chaotic world of metaphysical investigation at
which I was most busily occupied during the earlier years of our marriage.
With how vast a triumph--with how vivid a delight--with how much of all that
is ethereal in hope--did I feel, as she bent over me in studies but little
sought--but less know--that delicious vista by slow degrees expanding before
me, down whose long, gorgeous, and all untrodden path, I might at length
pass onward to the goal of a wisdom too divinely precious not to be forbidden!

How poignant, then, must have been the grief with which, after some years,
Ibeheld my well-grounded expectations take wings to themselves and fly away!
Without Ligeia I was but as a child groping benighted.  Her presence, her
readings alone, rendered vividly luminous the many mysteries of the 
transcendentalism in which we were immersed.  Wanting the radiant lustre
of her eyes, letters, lambent and golden, grew duller than Saturnian lead.
And now those eyes shone less and less frequently upon the pages over which
I pored.  Ligeia grew ill.  The wild eyes blazed with a too--too glorious
effulgence; the pale fingers became of th transparent waxen hue of the grave,
and the blue veins upon the lofty forehead swelled and sank impetuously with
the tides of the most gentle emotion.  I saw that she must die--and I
struggled desperately in spirit with the grim Azrael.  And the struggles of
the passionate wife were, to my astonishment, even more energetic than my
own.  There had been much in her stern nature to impress me with the belief
that, to her, death would have come without its terrors;--but not so.  Words
are very imptent to convey any just idea of the fierceness of resistance
with which she wrestled with the Shadow.  I groaned in anguish at the 
pitiable spectacle.  I would have soothed--I would have reasoned; but, in
the intensity of her wild desire for life,--for life--but for life--solace
and reason were alike the uttermost of folly.  Yet not until the last
instance, amid the most convulsive writhings of her fierce spirit, was 
shaken by the external placidity of her demeanor.  Her voice grew more
gentle--grew more low--yet I would not wish to dwell upon the wild meaning
of the quietly uttered words.  My brain reeled as I hearkened entranced,
to a melody more than mortal--to assumptions and aspirations which mortality
had never before known.

That she love me I should not have doubted; and I might have been easily 
aware that, in a bosom such as hers, love woudl have reigned no ordinary
passion.  But in death only, was I fully impressed with the strength of her
affection.  For long hours, detaining my hand, would she pour out before me
the overflowing of a heart whose more than passionate devotion amounted to
idolatry.  How had I deserved to be so blessed by such confessions?--how
had I deserved to be so cursed with the removal of my beloved in the hour of
her making them?  But upon this subject I cannot bear to dilate.  Let me say
only, that in Ligeia's more than womanly abandonment to a love, alas! all
unmerited, all unworthily bestowed, I at length recognized the principal of
her longing with so wildly earnest a desire for the life which was now fleeing
so rapidly away.  It is this wild longing--it is this eager vehemence of desire
for life--but for life--that I have no power to portray--no utterance capable
of expressing.

At high noon on the night in which she departed, beckoning me, peremptorily,
to her side, she bad me repeat certain verses composed by herself not many
days before.  I obeyed her.--They were these:

'O God!' half shrieked Ligeia, leaping to her feet an extending her arms
aloft with a spasmodic movement, as I made an end of these lines--'O God!
O Divine Father! shall these things be undeviatingly so?--shall this
Conqueror be not once conquered?  Are we not part and parcel in Thee?  Who
--who knoweth the mysteries of th will with its vigor?  Man doth not yield
him to the angels, nor unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of
his feeble will.'

And now, as if exhausted with emotion, she suffered her white arms to fall,
and returned solemnly to her bed of death.  And as she breathed her last
sighs, there came mingled with them a low murmer from her lips.  I bent to
them my ear and distinguished, again, the concluding words of the passage
in Glandvill--'Man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto death utterly,
save only through the weakness of his feeble will.'

She died;--and I, crushed into the very dust with sorrow, could no longer
endure the lonely desolation of my dwelling in the dim and decaying city
by the Rhine.  I had no lack of what the world calls wealth.  Ligeia had
brought me far more, very far more than ordinarily falls the lot of mortals.
After a few months, therefore, of weary and aimless wandering, I purchased,
and put in some repair, an abbey, which I shall not name, in one of the
wildest and least frequented portions of fair England.  The gloomy and dreary
grandeur of the building, the almost savage aspect of the domain, the many
melancholy and time-honored memories connected with both, had much in unison
with the feelings of utter abandonment which had driven me into that remote
and unsocial region of the country.  Yet although the external abbey, with
its verdant decay hanging about it, suffered but little alteration, I gave
way, with a child-like perversity, and perchance with a faint hope of
alleviating my sorrows, to a display of more than regal magnificence within.
--For such follies, even in childhood, I had imbibed a tast and now they
came back to me as in the dotage of grief.  Alas, I feel how much even of
incipient madness might have been discovered in the gorgeous and fantastic
draperies, in the solemn carving of Egypt, in the wild cornices and furniture,
in the Bedlam patterns of the carpets of tufted gold!  I had become a bounden
slave in the trammels of opium, and my labors and my orders had taken a 
coloring from my dreams.  But these absurdities I must not pause to detail.
Let me speak only of that one chamber, ever accursed, whither in a moment of
mental alienation, I lead from the altar as my bride--as the successor of the
unforgotten Ligeia--the fair-haired and blue-eyed Lady Rowena Trevanion,
of Tremaine.

There is no individual portion of the architecture and decoration of that
bridal chamber which is not now visibly before me.  Where were the souls of
the haughty family of the bride, when, through thirst of gold, they permitted
to pass the threshold of an apartment so bedecked, a maiden and  daughter so
beloved?  I have said that I minutely remember the details of the chamber--yet
I am sadly forgetful on topics of deep moment--and here there was no system,
no keeping, in the fantastic display, to take hold upon the memory.  The room
lay in a high turret of the castellated abbey, was pentagonal in shape, and
of capacious size.  Occupying the whole southern face of the pentagon was the
sole window--an immense sheet of unbroken glass from Venice--a single pane,
and tinted of a leaden hue, so that the rays of either the sun or moon, passing
through it, fell with a ghastly lustre on the objects within.  Over the upper
portion of this huge window, extended the trellice-work of an aged vine, which
clambered up the massy walls of the turret.  The ceiling, of gloomy-looking
oak, was excessively lofty, vaulted, and elaborately fretted with the wildest
and most grotesque specimens of a semi-Gothic, semi-Druidical device.  From
out the most central recess of this melancholy vaulting, depended, by a single
chain of gold with long links, a huge censer of the same metal, Saracenic in
pattern, and with many perforations so contrived that there writhed in and
out of them, as if endued with a serpent vitality, a continual succession
of parti-colored fires.

Some few ottomans and golden candelabra, of Eastern figure, were in various
stations about--and there was the couch, too--the bridal couch--of an Indian
model, and low, and sculptured of solide ebony, with a pall-like canopy above.
In each of the angles of the chamber stood on end a gigantic sarcophagus fo
black granite, from the tombs of the kings over against Luxor, with their
aged lids full of immemorial sculpture.  But in the draping of the apartment
lay, alas! the chief phantasy of all. The lofty walls, gigantic in height--
even unproportionably so--were hung from summit to foot, in vast folds, with
a heavy and massive-looking tapestry--tapestry of a material which was found
alike as a carpet on the floor, as a covering for the ottomans and the ebony
bed, as a canopy for the bed, and as the gorgeous volutes of th curtains which
partially shaded the window.  The material was the richest cloth of gold.  It
was spotted all over, at irregular intervals, with arabesque figures, about a
foot in diameter, and wrought upon the cloth in patterns of the most jetty
black.  But these figurs partook of the true character of the arabesque only
when regarded from a single point of view.  By a contrivance now common, and
indeed traceable to a very remote period of antiquity, they were made 
changeable in aspect.  To one entering the room, they bore the appearance of
simple monstrosities; but upon a farther advance, this appearance gradually
departed; and step by step, as the visiter moved his station in the chamber,
he saw himself surrounded by an endless succession of the ghastly forms which
belong to the superstition of the Norman, or arise in the guilty slumbers of
the monk.  The phantasmagoric effect was vastly heightened by the artificial
introduction of a strong continual current of the wind behind the draperies--
giving a hideous and uneasy animation to the whole.

In halls such as these--in a bridal chamber such as this--I passed, with the
Lady of Tremaine, the unhallowed hours of the first month of our marriage--
passed them with but little disquietude.  That my wife dreaded the fierce 
moodiness of my temper--that she shunned me and loved me but little--I could
not help perceiving; but it gave me rather pleasure than otherwise.  I loathed
her with a hatred belong more to demon than to man.  My memory flew back,
(oh, with what intensity of regret!) to Ligeia, the beloved, the august, the
beautiful, the entombed.  I revelled in recollections of her purity, of her
wisdom, of her lofty, her ethereal nature, of her passionate, her idolatrous
love.  Now, then, did my spirit fully and freely burn with more than all the 
fires of her own.  In the excitement of my opium dreams (for I was habitually
fettered in the shackles of the drug) I would call aloud upon her name, during
the silence of the night, or among the sheltered recesses of the glens by day,
as if, through the wild eagerness, the solemn passion, the consuming ardor
of my longing for the departed, I could restore her to the pathway she had
abandoned--ah, could it be forever?--upon the earth.  

About the commencement of the second month of the marriage, the Lady Rowena
was attacked with sudden illness, from which her recovery was slow.  The fever
which consumed her rendered her nights uneasy; and in her perturbed state of 
half-slumber, she spoke of sounds, and of motions, in and about the chamber 
of the turret, which I concluded had no origin save in the distemper of her
fancy, or perhaps in the phantasmagoric influences of the chamber itself.
She became at length convalescent--finally well.  Yet but a brief period
elapsed, ere a second more violent disorder again threw her upon a bed of
suffering; and from this attack her frame, at all times feeble, never 
altogether recovered.  Her illnesses were, after this epoch, of alarming
character, and of more alarming recurrence, defying alkike the knowledge
and the great exertions of her physicians.  With the increase of the chronic
disease which had thus, apparently, taken too sure hold upon her constitution
to be eradicated by human means, I could not fail to observe a similar
increase in the nervous irritation of her temperament, and in her excitability
by trivial causes of fear.  She spoke again, and now more frequently and
pertinaciously, of the sounds--of the slight sounds--and of the unusual
motions among the tapestries, to which she had formerly alluded.

One night, near the closing in of September, she pressed this distressing
subject with more than usual emphasis upon my attention.  She had just
awakned from an unquiet slumber, and I had been watching, with feelings
half of anxiety, half of vague terror, the workings of her emaciated
countenance.  I sat by the side of her ebony bed, upon one of the ottomans
of India.  She partly arose, and spoke, in an earnest low whisper, of sounds
which she then heard, but which I could not hear--of motions which she then
saw, but which I could not perceive.  The wind was rushing hurriedly behind
the tapestries, and I wished to show her (what, let me confess it, I could
not all believe) that those almost inarticulate breathings, and those very
gentle variations of the figures upon the wall, were but the natural effects
of that customary rushing of the wind.  But a deadly pallor, overspreading
her face, had proved to me that my exertions to reassure her would be 
fruitless.  She appeared to be fainting, and no attendants were within call.
I remembered where was deposited a decanter of light wine which had been
ordered by her physicians, and hastened across the chamber to procure it.
But, as I stepped beneath the light of the censer, two circumstances of a
startling nature attracted my attention.  I had felt that some palpable
although invisible object had passed lightly by my person; and I saw that
there lay upon the golden carpet, in the very middle of the rich lustre 
thrown from th censer, a shadow--a faint, indefinie shadow of angelic aspect--
such as might be fancied for the shadow of a shade.  But I was wild with the
excitement of an immoderate dose of opium, and heeded these things but little,
nor spoke of them to Rowena.  Having found the wine, I recrossed the chamber,
and poured out a goblet-ful, which I held to the lips of the fainting lady.
She had now partially recovered, however, and took th vessel herself, while
I sank upon an ottoman near me, with my eyes fastened upon her person.  It
was then that I became distinctly aware of a gentle foot-fall upon the carpet,
and near the couch; and in a second thereafter, as Rowena was in the act of
raising the wine to her lips, I saw, or may have dreamed that I saw, fall 
within the goblet, as if from some invisible spring in the atmosphere of the
room, three or four large drops of a brilliant and ruby colored fluid.  If
this I saw--not so Rowena.  She swallowed the wine unhesitatingly, and I
forbore ot speak to her of a circumstance which must, after all, I considered,
have been but the suggestion of a vivid imagination, rendered morbidly active
by the terror of the lady, by the opium, and by the hour.

Yet I cannot conceal it from my own perception that, immediately subsequent
to the fall of the ruby-drops, a rapid change for th worse took place in the
disorder of my wife; so that, on the third subsequent night, the hands of her
menials prepared her for the tomb, and on the fourth, I sat alone, with her
shrouded body, in that fantastic chamber which had received her as my bride.
--Wild visions, opium-engendered, flitted, shadow-like, before me.  I gazed
with unquiet eye upon the sarcophagi in the angles of the room, upon the
varying figures of the drapery, and upon the writhing of the parti-colored
fires in the censer overhead.  My eyes then fell, as I called to mind the
circumstances of a former night, to the spot beneath the glare of the censer
where I had seen the faint traces of the shadow.  It was there, however,
no longer; and breathing with greater freedom, I turned my glances to the
pallid and rigid figure upon the bed.  Then rushed back upon me a thousand
memories of Ligeia--and then came back upon my heart, with the turbulent
violence of a flood, the whole of that unuttterable wo with which I had 
regarded her thus enshrouded.  The night waned; and still, with a bosom
full of bitter thoughts of the one only and supremely beloved, I remained
gazing upon the body of Rowena.

It might have been midnight, or perhaps earlier, or later, for I had taken
no note of time, when a sob, low, gentle, but very distinct, startled me
from my revery.--I felt that it came from the bed of ebony--the bed of death.
I listened in an agony of superstitious terror--but there was no repetition of
the sound.  I strained my vision to detect any motion in the corpse--but
there was not the slightest perceptible.  Yet I could not have been deceived.
I had heard the noise, however faint, and my soul was awakened within me.
I resolutely and perseveringly kept my attention riveted upon the body.  Many
minutes elapsed before any circumstance occurred tending to throw light upon
the mystery.  At length it became evident that a slight, a very feeble, and
barely noticeable tinge of color had flushed up within the cheeks, and along
the sunken small veins of the eyelids.  Through a species of unutterable
horror and awe, for which the language of mortality has no sufficiently 
energetic expression, I felt my heart cease to beat, my limbs grow rigid
where I sat.  Yet a sense of duty finally operated to restore my 
self-possession.  I could no longer doubt that we had been precipitate in
our preparations--that Rowena still lived.  It was necessary that some
immediate exertion be made; yet the turret was altogether apart from the
portion of the abbey tenanted by the servants--there were none within call--
I had no means of summoning them to my aid without leaving the room for
many minutes--and this I could not venture to do.  I therefore struggled
along in my endeavors to call back the spirit still hovering.  In a short
period it was certain, however, that a relapse had  taken place; the color
disappeared from both eyelid and cheek, leaving a wanness even more than 
that of marble; the lips became doubly shrivelled and pinhed up in the 
ghastly expression of death; a repulsive clamminess and coldness overspread
rapidly the surface of the body; and all the usual rigorous stiffness 
immediately supervened.  I fell back with a shudder upon the couch from 
which I had been so startlingly aroused, and again gave myself up to 
passionate waking visions of Ligeia.

An hour thus elapsed when (could it be possible?) I was a second time aware
of some vague sound issuing from the region of the bed.  I listened--in
extremity of horror.  The sound came again--it was a sigh.  Rushing to the
corpse, I saw--distinctly saw--a tremorupon the lips.  In a minute afterward
tye relaxed, disclosing a bright line of the pearly teeth.  Amazement now
struggled in my bosom with the profound awe which had hitherto reigned there
alone.  I felt that my vision grew dim, that my reason wandered; and it was
only by a violent effort that I at length succeeded in nerving myself to the
task which duty thus once more had pointed out.  There was now a partial
glow upon the forehead and upon the cheek and throat; a perceptible warmth
pervaded the whole frame; there was even a slight pulsation at the heart.
The lady lived; and with redoubled ardor I betook myself to the task of
restoration.  I chafed and bathed the temples and the hands, and used every
exertion which experience, and no little medical reading, could suggest.
But in vain.  Suddenly, the color fled, the pulsation ceased, the lips
resumed the expression of the dead, and, in an instant afterward, the whole
body took upon itself the icy chilliness, the livid hue, the intense 
rigidity, the sunken outline, and all the loathsome peculiarities of that
which has been, for many days, a tenant of the tomb.

And again I sunk into visions of Ligeia--and again, (what marvel that I 
shudder while I write?) again there reached my ears a low sob from the region
of the ebony bed.  But why shall I minutely detail the unspeakable horrors
of that night?  Why shall I pause to relate how, time after time, until near
the period of the gray dawn, this hideous drama of revification was repeated;
how each terrific relapse wasonly into a sterner and apparently more
irredeemable death; how each agony wore the aspect of a struggle with some
invisible foe; and how each struggle was succeeded by I know not what of wild
change in the personal appearance of the corpse?  Let me hurry to a conclusion.

The greater part of the fearful night had worn away, and she who had been
dead, one again stirred--and now more vigorously than hitherto, although 
arousing from a dissolution more appalling in its utter hopelessness than any.
I had long ceased to struggle or to move, and remained sitting rigidly upon
the ottoman, a helpless prey to a whirl of violent emotions, of which extreme
awe was perhaps the least terrible, the least consuming.  The corpse, I
repeat, stirred, and now more vigorously than before.  The hues of life
flushed up with unwonted energy into the countenance--the limbs relaxed--and,
save that they eyelids were yet pressed heavily together, and that the 
bandages and draperies of the grave still imparted their charnel character
to the figure, I might have dreamed that Rowena had indeed shaken off, utterly,
the fetters of Death.  But if this idea was not, even then, altogether
adopted, I could at least doubt no longer, when, arising from the bed, 
tottering, with feeble steps, with closed eyes, and with the manner of one
bewildered in a dream, the thing that was enshrouded advanced boldly and
palpably into the middle of the apartment.

I trembled not--I stirred not--for a crowd of unutterable fancies connected
with the air, the stature, the demeanor of the figure, rushing hurriedly
through my brain, had paralyzed--had chilled me into stone.  I stirred not--
but gazed upon the apparition.  There was a mad disorder in my thoughts--
a tumult unappeasable.  Could it, indeed, be the living Rowena who confronted
me?  Could it indeed be Rowena at all--the fair-haired, the blue-eyed Lady 
Rowena Trevanion of Tremaine?  Why, why should I doubt it?  The bandage lay
heavily about the mouth--but then might it not be the mouth of the breathing
Lady of Tremaine.  And the cheeks--there were the roses as in her noon of
life--yes, these might indeed be the fair cheeks of the living Lady of 
Tremaine.  And the chin, with its dimples, as in health, might it not be hers?
--but had she then grown taller since her malady?  What inexpressible madness 
seized me with that thought?  One bound, and I had reached her feet!
Shrinking from my touch, she let fall from her head, unloosened, the ghastly
cerements which had confined it, and there streamed forth, into the rushing
atmosphere of the chamber, huge masses of long and dishevelled hair; it was
blacker than the raven wings of the midnight!  And now slowly opened the 
eyes of the figure which stood before me.  'Here than, at least,' I shrieked
aloud, 'can I never--can I never be mistaken--these are the full, and the 
black, and the wild eyes--of my lost love--of the lady--of the LADY LIGEIA.'